Table 1. Greece: Prior Actions
Policy

Actions to be taken in consultation with EC/ECB/IMF staff:

CHAPTER 1. 2015 supplementary budget and 2016-19 MTFS
Adopt effective as of July 1, 2015 a supplementary 2015 budget and a 2016–19 medium-term fiscal strategy,
supported by a sizable and credible package of measures. The new fiscal path is premised on a primary surplus target
of 1, 2, 3, and 3.5 percent of GDP in 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018. The package includes VAT reforms (§2), other tax
policy measures (§3), pension reforms (§4), public administration reforms (§5), reforms addressing shortfalls in tax
collection enforcement (§6), and other parametric measures as specified below.

CHAPTER 2. VAT reform
Adopt legislation to reform the VAT system that will be effective as of July 1, 2015. The reform will target a net
revenue gain of 1 percent of GDP on an annual basis from parametric changes. The new VAT system will: (i) unify the
rates at a standard 23 percent rate, which will includerestaurants, hotels and catering, and a reduced 13 percent rate
for basic food, energy, and water (excluding sewage),and a super-reduced rate of 6 percent for pharmaceuticals,
books, and theater; (ii) streamline exemptions to broaden the base and raise the tax on insurance; and (iii) eliminate
discounts, including on islands.
The increase of the VAT rate described above may be reviewed at the end of 2016, provided that equivalent
additional revenues are collected through measures taken against tax evasion and to improve collectability of VAT.
Any decision to review shall take place in consultation with the institutions.

CHAPTER 3. Fiscal structural measures
Adopt legislation to:
•

close possibilities for income tax avoidance (e.g., tighten the definition of farmers), take measures to increase
the corporate income tax in 2015 and require 100 percent advance payments for corporate income as well as
individual business income tax by end-2016; eliminate the preferential tax treatment of farmers in the income
tax code; raise the solidarity surcharge;

•
abolish subsidies for excise on diesel oil for farmersand better target eligibility to halve heating oil subsidies

expenditure in the budget 2016;
•

In view of any revision of the zonal property values, adjust the property tax rates if necessary to safeguard the
2015 and 2016 property tax revenues at €2.65 billion and adjust the alternative minimum personal income
taxation.

•

eliminate the cross-border withholding tax introduced by the installments act (law XXXX/2015) and reverse the
recent amendments to the ITC in the public administration act (law XXXX/2015), including the special
treatment of agricultural income.

•

adopt outstanding reforms on the codes on income tax, and tax procedures: introduce a new Criminal Law on
Tax Evasion and Fraud to amend the Special Penal Law 2523/1997 and any other relevant legislation, and
replace Article 55, §s 1 and 2, of the TPC, with a view, inter alia, to modernize and broaden the definition of tax
fraud and evasion to all taxes; abolish all Code of Book and Records fines, including those levied under law
2523/1997 develop the tax framework for collective investment vehicles and their participants consistently
with the ITC and in line with best practices in the EU.

•

adopt legislation to upgrade the organic budget law to: (i) introduce a framework for independent agencies;
(ii) phase out ex-ante audits of the Hellenic Court of Auditors and account officers (ypologos); (iii) give GDFSs
exclusive financial service capacity and GAO powers to oversee public sector finances; and (iv) phase out fiscal
audit offices by January 2017.

•

increase the rate of the tonnage tax and phase out special tax treatments of the shipping industry.

By September 2015, (i) simplify the personal income tax credit schedule; (ii) re-design and integrate into the ITC the
solidarity surcharge for income of 2016 to more effectively achieve progressivity in the income tax system; (iii) issue a
circular on fines to ensure the comprehensive and consistent application of the TPC; (iv) and other remaining reforms
as specified in §9 of the IMF Country Report No. 14/151.
On health care, effective as of July 1, 2015, (i) re-establish full INN prescription, without exceptions, (ii) reduce as a first
step the price of all off-patent drugs to 50 percent and all generics to 32.5 percent of the patent price, by repealing
the grandfathering clause for medicines already in the market in 2012, and (iii)) review and limit the prices of
diagnostic tests to bring structural spending in line with claw back targets; and (iv) collect in the full the 2014 clawback
for private clinics, diagnostics and pharmaceuticals, and extend their 2015 clawback ceilings to 2016.
Launch the Social Welfare Review under the agreed terms of reference with the technical assistance of the World Bank
to target savings of ½ percent of GDP which can help finance a fiscally neutral gradual roll-out of the GMI in January
2016Incorporate into the 2016 budget:

•

reduction in the expenditure ceiling for military spending by €400 million with a targeted set of actions,
including a reduction in headcount and procurement;

•

introduce reform of the income tax code, inter alia covering capital taxation], investment vehicles, farmers and
the self- employed, etc.;

•

raise the corporate tax rate from 26% to 28%;

•

introduce tax on television advertisements;

•

announce international public tender for the acquisition of television licenses and usage related fees of
relevant frequencies;

•

extend implementation of luxury tax on recreational vessels in excess of 10 meters and increase the rate from
10% to 13%, coming into effect from the collection of 2014 income taxes and beyond;

•

implement taxation on Gross Gaming Revenues (GGR) of 30% on VLT games, expected to be installed at
second half of 2015 and 2016; and

•

launch the tender process for the issuing of 4G and 5G licences.

CHAPTER 4. Pension reform
The Authorities recognise that the pension system is unsustainable and needs fundamental reforms. This is why they
will implement in full the 2010 pension reform law (3863/2010), and implement in full or replace/adjust the
sustainability factors for supplementary and lump-sum pensions from the 2012 reform with to achieve equivalent
savings and take further steps to improve the pension system.
Effective from July 1, 2015 the authorities will phase-in reforms that would deliver estimated permanent savings of ¼½ percent of GDP in 2015 and 1 percent of GDP on a full year basis in 2016 and thereafter by adopting legislation to:
• create strong disincentives to early retirement, including the adjustment of early retirement penalties, and
through a gradual elimination of grandfathering to statutory retirement age and early retirement pathways
progressively adapting to the limit of statutory retirement age of 67 years,or 62 and 40 years of contributions
by 2022, applicable for all those retiring (except arduous professions, and mothers with children with

disability)after June 30, 2015;

•

•

Adopt legislation so that withdrawals from the Social Insurance Fund will incur an annual penalty, for those
affected by the extension of the retirement age period, equivalent to 10 percent on top of the current penalty
of 6 percent;
integrate into ETEA all supplementary pension funds and ensure that, starting January 1, 2015, all
supplementary pension funds are only financed by own contributions;

•

better target social pensions by increasing OGA uninsured pension;

•

Gradually phase out the solidarity grant (EKAS) for all pensioners by end-December 2019. This shall start
immediately as regards the top 20% of beneficiaries with the modalities of the phase out to be agreed with
the institutions;

•

freeze monthly guaranteed contributory pension limits in nominal terms until 2021;

•

provide to people retiring after 30 June 2015 the basic, guaranteed contributory, and means tested pensions
only at the attainment of the statutory normal retirement age of currently 67 years;

•

increase the relatively low health contributions for pensioners from 4% to 6% on average and extend it to
supplementary pensions;

•

phase out all state-financed exemptions and harmonize contribution rules for all pension funds with the
structure of contributions to IKA from 1 July 2015;

Moreover, the authorities will by 31 October 2015, legislate further reforms to take effect from January 1, 2016
(i) specific design and parametric improvements to establish a closer link between contribution and benefits;
(ii) broaden and modernize the contribution and pension base for all self-employed, including by switching
from notional to actual income, subject to minimum required contribution rules; (iii) revise and rationalize all
different systems of basic, guaranteed contributory and means tested pension components, taking into
account incentives to work and contribute; (iv) the main elements of a comprehensive SSFs consolidation,
including any remaining harmonization of contribution and benefit payment rules and procedures across all
funds; (v) abolish all nuisance charges financing pensions and offset by reducing benefits or increasing
contributions in specific funds to take effect from 31 October 2015; and (vi) harmonize pension benefit rules
of the agricultural fund (OGA) with the rest of the pension system in a pro rata manner, unless OGA is merged
into other funds. The consolidation of social insurance funds will take place by end 2017over two years. In
2015, the process will be activated through legislation to consolidate the social insurance funds under a single

entityand the operational consolidation will have been completed by 31 December 2016. Further reductions in
the operating costs and a more effective management of fund resources including improved balancing of
needs between better-off and poorer-off funds will be actively encouraged.
The authorities will adopt legislation to fully offset the fiscal effects of the implementation of court rulings on the 2012
pension reform.

In parallel to the reform of the pension system, a Social Welfare Review will be carried out to ensure fairness of the
various reforms.

The institutions are prepared to take into account other parametric measures within the pension system of equivalent
effect to replace some of the measures mentioned above, taking into account their impact on growth, and provided
that such measures are presented to the institutions during the design phase and are sufficiently concrete and
quantifiable, and in the absence of this the default option is what is specified above.

CHAPTER 5. Public Administration, Justice and Anti Corruption
Adopt legislation to:
•

reform the unified wage grid, effective 1 January, 2016, setting the key parameters in a fiscally neutral manner
and consistent with the agreed wage bill targets and with comprehensive application across the public sector,
including decompressing the wage distribution across the wage spectrum in connection with the skill,
performance and responsibility of staff.

•

legislation to rationalise the specialised wage grids, will be adopted by end-November 2015

•

align non-wage benefits such as leave arrangements, per diems, travel allowances and perks, with best
practices in the EU, effective 1 January 2016;

•

establish within the new MTFS ceilings for the wage bill and the level of public employment consistent with
achieving the fiscal targets and ensuring a declining path of the wage bill relative to GDP until 2019;

•

hire managers and assess performance of all employees (with the aim to complete the hiring of new managers
by 31 December 2015 subsequent to a review process).

•

reform the Civil Procedure Code, in line with previous agreements;

•

strengthen the governance of ELSTAT. It shall cover (i) the role and structure of the Advisory bodies of the
Hellenic Statistical System, including the recasting of the Council of ELSS to an advisory Committee of the
ELSS, and the role of the Good Practice Advisory Committee (GPAC); (ii) the recruitment procedure for the
President of ELSTAT, to ensure that a President of the highest professional calibre is recruited, following
transparent procedures and selection criteria; (iii) the involvement of ELSTAT as appropriate in any legislative
or other legal proposal pertaining to any statistical matter; (iv) other issues that impact the independence of
ELSTAT, including financial autonomy, the empowerment of ELSTAT to reallocate existing permanent posts
and to hire staff where it is needed and to hire specialised scientific personnel, and the classification of the
institution as a fiscal policy body in the recent law 4270/2014; role and powers of Bank of Greece in statistics
in line with European legislation.
Publish a revised Strategic Plan against Corruption by 31 July 2015. Amend and implement the legal
framework for the declaration of assets and financing of the political parties and adopt legislation insulating
financial crime and anti-corruption investigations from political intervention in individual cases.

CHAPTER 6. Tax administration
Take the following actions to:
•

Adopt legislation to establish an autonomous revenue agency, that
specifies: (i) the agency’s legal form, organization, status, and scope; (ii) the powers and functions of the CEO
and the independent Board of Governors; (iii) the relationship to the Minister of Finance and other
government entities; (iv) the agency’s human resource flexibility and relationship to the civil service; (v)
budget autonomy, with own GDFS and a new funding formula to align incentives with revenue collection and
guarantee budget predictability and flexibility; (vi) reporting to the government and parliament; and (vii) the
immediate transfer of all tax-related capacity and staff in other entities (including SDOE) to the agency.

•

on garnishments, adopt legislation to eliminate the 25 percent
ceiling on wages and pensions and lower all thresholds of €1,500 while ensuring reasonable living conditions;
accelerate procurement of IT infrastructure to automatize e-garnishment; improve tax debt write-off rules[to
be specified]; remove tax officers’ personal liabilities for not pursuing old debt;remove restrictions on
conducting audits of tax returns from 2012 subject to the external tax certificate scheme; and enforce if
legally possible upfront payment collection in tax disputes.

•

amend (i) the 2014–15 tax and SSC debt instalment schemes toexclude those who fail to pay current
obligations and introduce a requirement for the tax and social security administrations to shorten the
duration for those with the capacity to pay earlier and introduce market-based interest rates; the LDU and
KEAO will assess by September 2015 the large debtors with tax and SSC debt exceeding €1 million and (ii) the

basic instalment scheme/TPC to adjust the market-based interest rates and suspend until end-2017 thirdparty verification and bank guarantee requirements.
•

Adopt legislation to accelerate de-registration procedures and limit VAT re-registration to protect VAT
revenues and accelerate procurement of network analysis software; and provide the Presidential Decree
needed for the significantly strengthening the reorganisation of the VAT enforcement section in order to
strengthen VAT enforcement and combat VAT carousel fraud. The authorities will submit an application to the
EU VAT Committee and prepare an assessment of the implication of an increase in the VAT threshold to
€25.000.

•

combat fuel smuggling, via legislative measures for locating storage tanks (fixed or mobile);

•

produce a plan whereby the SGPR intensifiesfight to tax evasion and undeclared deposits, by checking bank
transactions in banking institutions in Greece or abroad, with a view to recover unpaid taxes;

•

develop a costed plan for the promotion of the use of electronic payments, making use of the EU Structural
and Investment Fund;

CHAPTER 7. Financial sector
Adopt: (i) amendments to the corporate and household insolvency laws including to cover all debtors and bring the
corporate insolvency law in line with the OCW law; (ii) amendments to the household insolvency law to introduce a
mechanism to separate strategic defaulters from good faith debtors as well as simplify and strengthen the procedures
and introduce measures to address the large backlog of cases; (iii) amendments to improve immediately the judicial
framework for corporate and household insolvency matters; (iv) legislation to establish a regulated profession of
insolvency administrators, not restricted to any specific profession and in line with good cross-country experience; (v)
a comprehensive strategy for the financial system: this strategy will build on the strategy document from 2013, taking
into account the new environment and conditions of the financial system and with a view of returning the banks in
private ownership by attracting international strategic investors and to achieve a sustainable funding model over the
medium term; and (vi) a holistic NPL resolution strategy, prepared with the help of a strategic consultant.

CHAPTER 8. Labour market
Launch a consultation process similar to that foreseen for the determination of the level of the minimum wage (Art.
103 of Law 4172/2013) to review the existing frameworks of collective dismissals, industrial action, and collective
bargaining, taking into account best practices elsewhere in Europe. Further input to the review described above will
be provided by international organisations, including the ILO.The organization and timelines shall be drawn up in
consultation with the institutions. No changes to the current collective bargaining framework will be made prior to
the conclusion of the review and in any case not before end-2015. Any proposed changes to the legislative

frameworks will only be adopted in agreement with the EC/ECB/IMF. The authorities will take actions to fight
undeclared work in order to strengthen the competitiveness of legal companies and protect workers as well as tax
and social security revenues.

CHAPTER 9. Product market
Adopt legislation to:
•

implement all the pending recommendations of the OECD
competition toolkit I, including inter alia truck licenses, and the OECD toolkit II recommendations on
beverages and petroleum products;

•

open the restricted professions of engineers, notaries, actuaries, and bailiffs, and liberalize the market for
tourist rentals and ferry transportation;

•

eliminate reciprocal and non-reciprocal nuisance charges;

•

(i) reduce red tape, including on horizontal licensing requirements of investments and on low-risk activities as
recommended by the World Bank, and administrative burden of companies based on the OECD
recommendations, and (ii) establish a committee for the inter-ministerial preparation of legislation. Technical
assistance of the World Bank will be sought to implement the easing of licensing requirements.

•
•

adopt the reform of the gas market and its specific roadmap, and implementation should follow suit.
take irreversible steps (including announcement of date for submission of binding offers) to privatize the
electricity transmission company, ADMIE.

•

On electricity markets, the authorities will reform the capacity payments system and other electricity market
rules to avoid that some plants are forced to operate below their variable cost, and to prevent the netting of
the arrears between PPC and market operator; set PPC tariffs based on costs, including replacement of the
20% discount for HV users with cost based tariffs; and notify NOME products to the European Commission.
The authorities will also continue the implementation of the roadmap to the EU target modelprepare a new
framework for the support of renewable energies and for the implementation of energy efficiency and review
energy taxation;

•

strengthen the electricity regulator’s financial and operational independence;

The Government will introduce legislation for the ratification of Directive 27/2012 on energy efficiency.

CHAPTER 10. Privatization
•

•

•
•
•

The Board of Directors of the Hellenic Republic Asset Development Fund will approve its Asset Development
Plan which will include for privatisation all the assets under HRDAF as of 31/12/2014; and the Cabinet will
endorse the plan.
To facilitate the completion of the tenders, the authorities will complete all government pending actions
including those needed for the regional airports, TRAINOSE, Egnatia, the ports of Pireaus and Thessaloniki and
Hellinikon (precise list in Technical Memorandum). This list of actions is updated regularly and the
Government will ensure that all pending actions are timely implemented.
The government and HRADF will announce binding bid dates for Piraeus and Thessaloniki ports of no later
than end-October 2015, and for TRAINOSE ROSCO, with no material changes in the terms of the tenders.
The government will transfer the state's shares in OTE to the HRADF.
Take irreversible steps for the sale of the regional airports at the current terms with the winning bidder already
selected.

